The locals call this Bowden's Pool,
after the Germanic pagan god,
who was credited with creating earth, sky, man, and woman.
The water is the source of the river lip,
which flows from the spar town of Bad Lipspringer,
into the Rhine and the industrial areas of the Ruhr Valley.
Today, it's a peaceful and prosperous little town,
just as it was 60 years ago,
when France and Hilder Kusserer arrived here
with our 11 children.
What began as a peaceful ittle became an epic battle
between good and evil,
as the Kussero's defied Hitler and the Nazi regime.
France and Hilder Kusserer were married in 1911,
three years before the Great War that traumatized Europe.
France Kusserer fought for his country,
but his life and beliefs were transformed.
The Kussero's story has been lovingly
chronicled by the eldest of the 11 children, Anne Marie,
now aged 78.
Anne Marie's parents were born into a comfortably off Protestant environment,
but the First World War and a chance meeting with the Jehovah's Witness
dramatically changed their lives.
France, at post office Clark and Hilder,
a former school teacher,
became full-time missionaries
for the International Bible Students Association.
They came to this house on the outskirts of Bad Lipspringer,
to set up congregations in Northwest failure.
No Kussero's live here today,
but when members of the family do return,
they're a vivid memories.
Mike Delena is the Kussero's fourth daughter.
What are your early memories of this house?
It was so nice. We played here in the garden.
And this little piece and then there,
also we had some trees,
these apples and some fruits.
We had some potatoes,
these salad and different things.
We played, we danced together,
and then they took some flowers,
they made a ring on the head.
Then we went down with these to the river,
to the river to bring the geese,
and they have to, they cooked.
Swim? No, swim?
All the two, yes, and we swam all the way.
You took the geese for a swim?
Yeah, yeah.
And on the way, they took the grass and they ate,
and they had many fun.
It's a long time since I was here,
not since 1939, I think.
The doors seem bigger then.
Hans Werner, now 63,
was the Kussero's 10th child.
It was a very happy time.
Especially as I had so many brothers and sisters.
Everything was happy until I went to school.
That was bad of course.
Every day when children went to school,
they sought in advance what will happen today?
What will happen today?
I remember many things.
I remember how strong we were,
how we didn't salute the flag,
how we wouldn't say,
how we acted a bit differently from other pupils.
Some days, their hearts and teachers were like a devil,
and he took my hand.
He said,
Hi, Hitler, I, Hitler, and beat me.
What are you so frightened?
They would hit you, did you never say hi, Hitler?
No, no, we never said.
Because my father said,
look,
Hi, Hitler means the salvation comes from Hitler.
Is we learned survival?
The high, the salvation comes by Jesus Christ.
The Kussero's house was known as the golden age.
A huge sign advertising the Jehovah's Witness magazine
was emblazoned in gold letters outside their home.
Inside, the parents gave the children their love and their time.
And they taught the Bible and music,
lessons which would have a lifetime's impact.
The Kussero's then and now firmly believe the creder
the Jehovah's Witnesses
that our world now influenced by Satan
will soon be transformed into the 1,000-year reign of Christ,
promised in the Bible.
The evil will die,
whilst the good and faithful will be physically reborn
into paradise.
It was for morning to the evening visiting people
who like to know what the Bible says
about preaching or missionary work.
They like to receive me.
Much of the literature distributed by the Kussero's
came from the Witnesses headquarters in New York.
In Germany, the Witnesses were a very small sect
of just 20,000 people,
and yet Hitler saw the movement as a rival ideology to the Nazis.
So he set out to seize their literature and wreck the organisation.
So where were the books and the literature?
Where was it?
Also, here also.
On the under the stairs?
Yes, there.
And also up here.
And how many times did the police come to the house?
Oh, many, many times.
And they hit them here?
Here?
Yes.
Here, here are these tiny,
tibre doors of the,
yeah, on the roof.
And since the books here,
10 metres long,
here, 10 metres,
and the Bücheran,
and then we put the stones into the light
and threw them over.
Here.
And here was a balcony,
and once again a balcony,
we had to go very carefully.
They came,
how many times did you say?
18 times,
16, 17, 18s.
And they always searched in this area?
Not found the books.
The Nazis weren't easily dissuaded.
The Golden Age sign on the Kustro's house was blacked out.
But although the witnesses had been officially banned,
the family maintained their religious activities in secret.
She said,
Magdalena, you go behind three, four metre behind me.
You carry the Bible
that I have nothing in my hand,
and she spoke with the people.
And there were one man.
I don't know what he,
he was a stranger.
He didn't belong to Batlif Springer.
And he denounced us.
He calls the police.
In 1936, six,
the first time my mother was arrested to Parabond.
This was the first time.
Franz and Hilda Kussero were among the hundreds of Jehovah's Witnesses
arrested by the Gestapo in 1936.
They were briefly reunited in 1937
when this last complete family photograph was taken.
Later that year,
that sun's secret died in a swimming accident.
His death signaled the end of the ittle.
By now, most Germans were wallowing in nationalistic pride
and revived economic fortune.
Communists, gypsies, homosexuals,
dissidents, the handicapped,
and above all the Jews
were hunted down, even in Batlif Springer.
Today, the town memorializes its former Jewish residents.
Little more than 50 years ago,
they were handing them out and bane for their blood.
It seems a long while ago,
for the moment, dissidents are tolerated.
Jehovah's Witnesses can sell their magazine, the watchtower,
and openly recruit converts.
In the 1930s, this street in Parabond was dominated by the prison,
and this is where the Kusaroes were jailed.
Witnesses began to lose their jobs and pensions.
The Gestapo stepped up their surveillance,
but the Kusaro's garden was still supplying fresh produce.
The three youngest members of the family
were being well cared for.
They were the next target.
At that time, I was ill and didn't go to school.
I was lying in bed here.
Suddenly, a car drove up.
There seemed to be two civilians in it.
I could see them from the window.
They burst in and wanted me to go with them.
They hesitated because I was ill.
And for appearances, Sake took me to a doctor
to see if I could be taken away.
I had to go to the doctor to see if I could be taken away.
Then, they collected my sister and brother from school.
And we left.
We were taken from school.
My brother, who was ill, was collected from home.
And we were taken by two policemen
to the orphanage in Dorsten.
I can still remember how I vomited all over the jacket
of one of the policemen.
It took a lot of effort to clean it up once the car stopped.
Then the journey continued to Dorsten and the orphanage.
In the morning, he again told us to give the Hitler salute.
And when we refused, he took us into a room,
laid us across the table and beat us black and blue.
It was bad.
We took a shower every evening.
And when the female head of the house saw us,
she made us bathe separately so that the other children would not see.
It was very bad.
When the Second World War began,
the two-old is Kusaro daughters Anne Marie and Valtraud,
escaped surveillance and left to find jobs in Berlin.
It was more difficult for their brothers.
In December 1939,
Wilhelm, after refusing military service, was thrown into jail.
Dear parents, brothers and sisters,
all of you know how much you mean to me.
And I am repeatedly reminded of this every time I look at our family photograph.
How harmonious things always were at home.
Nonetheless, above all else, we must love God as our fiora Jesus Christ commanded.
If we stand up for him, he will reward us.
As predominantly Aryan Germans,
Jehovah's Witnesses were sometimes allowed the privilege of a Nazi trial.
Later, Wilhelm's court appointed lawyer, Dr. James Raw,
wrote to the family.
I had long conversations with your son before his trial and admired his calm confidence of
faith. He never wavered, although he was severely pressed for more quarters.
He calmly accepted the announcement of the eye of his execution,
refusing again to change his mind, that is, to abandon his faith and save his life.
On the morning of the execution, I took his hand and said in consolation,
Mr. Kusaro, you have been wonderfully strong, remain strong now.
He squeezed my hand and smilingly replied, no doctor, don't be troubled.
I am gaining everlasting life. All this is only a change.
He asked me to send you his greetings.
He stood upright when facing death and was dead at once.
Unable to browbeat the witnesses, the Nazis tried lies and subterfuge.
With an elaborate ritual of deceit, they issued certificates and reports,
declaring that Wilhelm Kusaro had died a hero's death,
fighting for Hitler and the Third Reich.
For some unknown reason, the Nazis allowed the family to collect Wilhelm's body from
Munster Prison, where he'd been shot. His sister, Valtraald, helped arrange the funeral.
It shocked me, dear, but Wilhelm was too, until the days.
I have seen the body in the little hall there, and he was in a private suite or a suite,
and until here, Löcher, the bullet holes, and the blood was in the mouth.
There was a big funeral with a secret police around and then with persons in uniform policemen.
And my brother Karl had said some words, and later my brother Karl,
because he spoke a few words and the prayer Gestapo kept him.
Karl, son number three, was the next arrested. He was brutally tortured in Dakar and Saxon
House and concentration camps. In April 1941, the Gestapo swooped again.
After a brief release from jail, France and Hilder Kusaro were re-arrested,
as were their daughters Hildegard and Magdalena. Nazi tenants took over the house
that once proclaimed the dawning of a golden age. The Kusaroes were sent to concentration camps,
where the witnesses were forced to wear distinctive insignia. The Jews wore a yellow star,
the witnesses, a purple triangle. When we went through the concentration camp, we saw
this purple triangle, then I knew there's my sister. I said, hello sister, how are you?
What's your name? Where you come from? The witnesses fed better in the camps than many prisoners.
Absolute conviction in their faith and strict discipline helped them a rail.
Soon Magdalena was joined at Ravensbrook by her mother and her sister Hildegard.
I saw my mother, I was so happy and she told me everything she was happy and it was really good
because I had swollen arms, I couldn't walk, I couldn't dress myself because of this sickness,
was home or something. And my mother, she dressed me, she made my hair.
Despite the evil and hardship at Ravensbrook, Fra Kusaro kept her faith. Her son,
Wilhelm, had given his life for the faith and younger brother Wolfgang, when called for military
service, showed true Kusaro defiance. I was brought up as one of Jehovah's Witnesses,
according to God's word contained in the Holy Scriptures. The greatest and most holy law he
gave mankind is, you shall love your God above all else and your neighbor as yourself.
Other commandments read, you must not kill. Did our creator have all this written down for the trees?
Just as Jesus Christ and his disciples were persecuted, so our God's people also persecuted
today, I know for sure that if Jesus Christ were to live on earth today, he would be persecuted
just as he was then. Wolfgang was beheaded on March 28, 1942. The night before he wrote,
My dear parents and my dear brothers and sisters, I shall leave you as your third son and brother
early in the morning. Be not sad. The time will come when we shall be together again. Those
who sow with tears will reap with joy. In James 1 verse 12 it says, blessed is the man that
endures temptation. For when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which Jehovah has
promised to them that love him. In this faith and in this conviction, I go from you. Your son and
brother, Wolfgang. By now, Valtralt had returned from Berlin, a managed to find work in this
floor shop in Paddeborn. She was ordered to greet customers with the Hild Hitler salutation.
She refused. After being given eight days to change her mind, she still refused and was arrested
and imprisoned in Paddeborn and told to make ammunition. I cannot work for the war.
This I cannot work, this for the war. My brother is killed, this shot. My other brother is beheaded.
My three sisters, little ones, the Gestapo have kept me and my other brother in concentration
camp. My mother in concentration camp, my two sisters and also my father in prison. No, I cannot make it.
By 1944, just one member of the Cusero family was free and Marie, who was still in Berlin.
Every week, I had with me in my apartment some persons to have a Bible study. And therefore,
I was arrested, there must be a person who has observed us.
The Nazis had rounded up every single member of the family. Some were dead and the future for
the rest uncertain. Yet they had a lifeline. Unlike all other prisoners, Jehovah's witnesses could
secure their release simply by signing a declaration that they'd abandoned their faith.
Of the thousands arrested, only a handful did so. I was not ready to sign. I thought
I have think over my parents, my little children. I mean my brothers and my sisters. They are so
faithful, so obedient. All were so we all were separated. We were all separated. And when I
now am free, what should I do? My conscience, I have sought it over. It is impossible to be
unfaithful. How could I sign that I am not a witness? How could I leave my face? Never, never, never.
In April 1945, Ravenbrook concentration camp was liberated. Hilda Kusaro and her daughters were
released. Imprisonment had strengthened their faith and morally the witnesses had defeated the
Nazis. Hilda was reunited with her husband and with the surviving members of the family rebuilt
their lives. Although they never returned to their golden age home, they always remained faithful
Jehovah's witnesses. They were back in a Germany where the Protestant and Catholic churches were still
the predominant religious groups. Despite rebellion and martyrdom by some believers, most church
leaders had bowed the knee to the Nazis. Hitler confirmed a Catholic was never excommunicated.
The church was silent whilst millions of Jews and others died.
Among the organized Christian religions in Germany, it was only the Jehovah's witnesses who
refused any compromise at all with Hitler and the Nazis. Like the first Christians, they too
were reviled and ridiculed and they were martyred. Among the millions who perished in the Holocaust,
there were some 5,000 Jehovah's witnesses. And yet those who survived still proclaimed there is
a purpose to all this. There is a God.